[Music]
sorry okay I uh hello to everyone I was
uh I think I will be better if I don't
use PowerPoint sometimes it's
better just to share views because these
PowerPoint slides sometimes
may distract so very nice to be in this
group I know many of you but not
everyone and uh uh uh I will be happy to
share my experience mainly from yes from
my uh six years of reporter ship when I
was UN special reporter on the right to
health from
2020 uh but before that I want to share
how the background how I how I came to
to My Views and then contributed to
Global mental
health discour do you hear
me yes we do okay so um so I will start
from the fact that differently from many
of you I am coming from another
experiment let's say from Soviet type
socialism which is I know that still has
many fans in the west because I
understand people in so-called West that
they do not like capitalism so much that
they prefer any socialism to any
capitalism so I lived 32 years in this
orellan type of
socialism and Psychiatry was used
misused abused in very sophisticated way
um the roots of so-called Moscow school
of psychiatry
this interesting phenomenon that
Soviet leadership was obsessed to win
this cold war any cost so they created
idea that you know Capital we defeated
capitalism means according to France Fon
and others there are no more causes for
mental diseases yes I mean social
psychosocial this is why soet Soviet
ideology decided that the only the only
interpretation for any mental condition
can be biological so it very was a very
brutal biological Psychiatry they used
pavlovian pavlovian you know all this
research on Pavlo which was done on dogs
they just used for for human beings and
this concept of slugish schizophrenia
which is maybe more known
that you could di diagnose almost
everyone with schizophrenia was made
with scientific clothing there were a
lot of dissertations about this all
kinds of you know symptoms of so-called
sluggish schizophrenia any
any any Behavior which you notice that
it is a little bit unusual could be
qualified as schizophrenia but it was us
not not only for political purposes all
kind of child adolescent mental health
issues like eating disorders which were
slowly starting were qualified as
schizophrenia so U one special case was
in in my country in in Lithuania that
time occupied by Soviet Union I was a
teenager then the young guy of 19 year
old he put himself on fire in the center
of our Second City conas protesting
Soviet occupation so he died and
immediately after his death because
there were riots there was this case was
well known all over the world that not
everything is good in Soviet Empire so
the commission of psychiatrist was
appointed and after his death they
studied studied his case and they made
conclusion that he was Ill with the
schizophrenia not sluggish but but real
paranoid schizophrenia and because he
has long ha so means could not take care
physically on him of himself probably
you suspect why he had long here we all
were dreaming about free world including
Hipp movements and beetles and
everything so this was our life in in
the that kind of totalitarian system but
interestingly the the the main symptom
to convince that the he was severely
mentally ill that they found in his
school essay that sentence that I
believe that Lithuania one day will be
free means independent in 1972 that was
obvious Insanity because you know normal
people did not believe because too long
it was occupied and Guerilla movement
was suppressed so so people let's say
collaborated with the regime and one guy
told I believe that Lithuania will be
free and this was clear that so it's
like maybe only 1% think so so this this
is not normal this maybe this is sign of
schizophrenia uh interestingly after 17
years when all these peaceful Revolution
started in in my region incl including
Lithuania there was movement to
reevaluate this case because he was like
national hero you know and u i i was
appointed as a young psychiatrist to the
second commission I was not happy I
don't think that such commissions should
take place but you know and of course we
we were we did not want to be accused
that now we will Ser to other government
and we tell that no no he was very very
mentally health healthy and so on but we
studied so long we studied his case so
long that I I think he's the among
people who I know who I know best whom I
know best even if I didn't never met him
you know and um just our conclusion was
modest that we could not find any any
symptoms or mental disease we we don't
know if he had or not but we could not
find so I just want to tell you that
this decision is not Popular until now
among Lithuanian psychiatrists in
despite all these changes despite let's
say yes Democratic changes psychiatrist
the group who are loyal to their
teachers you know the teachers told that
he's schizophrenic how you de to doubt
and yes and he was was not really normal
because normal people as we know adapt
and those who are normal they they do
not adapt so so I want just to tell that
one of my teachers when I was young
psychiatrist was a uh the professor lady
who was taking care of me you know she
was very uh good good person
paternalistic and and she was so shocked
that in that second commission I am
I am you know moving to the idea that
there was no schizophrenia there and she
was talking to me a lot and she from
that talks I understand that they did
not need KGB to to to force them to
diagnose this was already in the mindset
of of psychiatrist that you know what
is what is normal and what is not normal
so the roots of this uh
let's say political abuse of Psychiatry
are very deep and they are internalized
in in and they started from political
ideas from you know repressive regimes
but they they became
the the the part of of of Psychiatry
just to finish this
part uh the Moscow school of Psychiatry
which I studied a lot I had some I had
many you know professors I knew many
professors in in in in Moscow I I was
thinking about their decisions like
intentions again that was for example
children with autism were diagnosed as
early on set schizophrenia from two
years of age three years of age and then
prescribing massive dosages of of you
know haloperidol so that was like
torture you no but they tell you no such
a severe illness and started so early so
we have to do everything I have seen a
lot of insulin coma therapy you know
which was perceived as a very
Progressive treatment and so on and the
diagnostic you know school from that was
professional
intuition just you are experienced and
you talk with patient and you feel like
they were quoting old German pet like PR
geul in German there this feeling of of
of you know schizophrenia and if
somebody will oppose so you will tell
you are not that experienced I'm
Professor I am you know I am in psychiet
20 years I know better and this this
person is is ill with
schizophrenia because he behaves not
logically he can he does not take care
of his own life he he goes into danger
he takes risk he does harm to his family
so why how do you think that he's normal
so they did not need in then they did
not need kjb they there was very sincere
belief about so this is why we should
should understand how sophisticated is
this phenomenon of political abuse of
Psychiatry then as you know changes were
starting in Soviet Union and this last
decade no this 80s 80s of last century
were very interesting because
World Psychiatric association started to
make pressure on on Soviet Psychiatry
and in famous Congress in Athens in 83
there was decision to to throw out
Soviet you know Psychiatric association
because of political abuse of Psychiatry
but the Soviets decided to leave before
yes and then slowly because of
perista the Psychiatry was changing and
in 89 they were already telling that we
we will we will change we know that
things were going wrong and now that was
effect of you know gorbachov reform and
so on and then as you know was the
collapse of Soviet Union so there were
many new countries including Russian
Federation with with yelon yes and so
these 10 years the last decade of last
century was very interesting because
even in Russian Federation because of
democratic changes Psychiatry started to
change
so so
the this
um yes because of democratic changes in
society there were many promises at
least rhetoric from Moscow that we Now
understand and we will follow let's say
International standards at least we will
not be involved in political abuse of
Psychiatry any longer and this lasted
until um
until
2010 yes until
2010 or no until 2000 year
20 when Putin came into power and and
then the regress of democracy
and in in Russia has led to uh to
increasing prevalence of political abuse
of Psychiatry again and it is going on
again and there are many many
documented docent cases of political
abuse of of Psychiatry so uh now I will
move to global
global situation and my experience what
I was doing all these years of my
reporter
ship and it's about factors I want to
elaborate on
factors um which are feeding let's say
or or preventing such harmful phenomenon
as political abuse of
Psychiatry both as we know they can be
both Beyond Psychiatry because we have a
lot of Human Rights issues Beyond
Psychiatry and then we have many issues
within Psychiatry so there are good news
to mention some good news that there are
many any good documents by United
Nations by Regional and National human
rights protection mechanism also by
medical and psychiatric uh professional
groups uh self-governing professional
groups at least in rhetorics there is
improving situation with protection of
of Human Rights uh of people with
psychosocial disabilities or or mental
disorders um so we have to acknowledge
this um but then yes and there are very
powerful for Resolutions maybe
ironically of Human Rights Council UN
Human Rights Council which other
otherwise can be Not Human Rights
friendly because of composition of this
Council but on mental health and human
rights there are four powerful
resolutions and mental health and human
rights with very strong wedding on human
rights on end of overmedicalization of C
of you know or social exclusion very
very good uh
wedding and um then there is a move the
who is moving so that last two documents
of 21 and
23 are quite you know good in sense of
recognizing that the this usable medical
model is not working and we should move
to rights-based
services to human rights based approach
so it's quite nice to read this these
documents I'm happy that I contributed
so that when I was special reporter I
did some reports and I especially
highlighted uh obstacles for realization
of good mental health I just question
this this you know burden of
mental diseases concept which is
medicalizing even further so instead I I
I raised the issue that the burden the
burden of obstacles and these obstacles
are excessive use of biomedical model
and interventions power asymmetries or
power
imbalances especially without
psychiatrist and and users of services
and biased use of evidence and knowledge
which amount to Corruption of knowledge
all these you know chemical imbalances
and so on and what is still in textbooks
sadly so and I think that this
has to do with what we speak today what
is theme my my theme political abuse of
Psychiatry it does not come in vacuum it
is it's symptom it's one of metastatic
symptoms of failed Sy systems most nasty
one of most nasty symptoms and then I I
was analyzing so where are these roots
and where are these obstacles that even
now there is so much political abuse of
psychiatry in modern world so here I I
See This Global picture like first is
what Derek was speaking so effects of
neoliberalism and colonialism and mental
health yes of course detrimental through
violation of
social and economic rights and response
of global Psychiatry and especially
leading academic centers yes in the west
is
to excessive medicalization
pathologization and mental health care
so that uh Power imbalances are
presented as if they are chemical
imbalances and then you go to to fix
disorders in brain instead of looking
what is happening in in Society so yes I
agree and that could be maybe qualified
as a soft way of abusing or maybe not
soft not direct political abuse of
Psychiatry but again Psychiatry is
misused Psychiatry is abused in this
way but on the other side and this is my
moral duty because of this my background
where I come from I always want to
remind that there is other side of the
coin that the effects of authoritarian
regimes on Mental Health on these
countries
who who you know killed all Civil
Society where there is no de democracy
no civil political rights and these in
these countries there are of course a
lot of problems with mental health and
with Psychiatry and in these countries
Psychiatry is serving to regimes and the
moral question for us
what what will we say about the
psychiatrist because this a case of dual
loyalty and if they in many countries if
they if they follow our you know
recommendations they will be imprisoned
or or maybe diagnosed as mentally ill so
so this is not so easy to to to to blame
our colleagues in in those regimes uh
but uh recent cases not to speak again
about Russia are in Iran where you know
Civil Disobedience of young people is
qualified as not as schizophrenia but as
antisocial personality disorder uh
and existing diagnostic classification
in general uh I we know how many
diagnostic categories we have I think
too many and so this is very easy even
without falsification to diagnose people
who who do not follow let's say the
rules established by regime so you you
you you can very
easily diagnose these people according
to
classification uh so this is one of
problems but also in these regimes which
are you know far from
democracy there are many discriminatory
laws and practices against vulnerable
groups against children against women
against LGBT
people and so on so this creates very
bad environment in all settings discri
with a lot of discrimination and
violence and this contributes of course
to to to to poor mental health so we
should not blame only let's say
neoliberalism we we should also speak
about these dictatorships which enjoy
when and liberal democracies are
criticized yes so that that is my my
position that we have two two wrong two
bad
scenarios and nothing in in between so
to say uh now I would like to raise some
issue of response from Psychiatric
community so if we go back from broad
picture we go back to Field of mental
health yes Global mental health global
Psychiatry so what is response from
Psychiatric communities to political
abuse of Psychiatry and other human
rights violations in Psychiatry very
very colorful picture very different
scenarios in authoritarian regimes again
because of situation of dual loyalty
either you oppose and
confront uh you know then you become a
dissident yes or you collaborate so it's
a very painful decision of course but in
democracies uh there is a very
interesting picture there are
psychiatric associations which are more
sensitive to human rights which are less
sensitive which are more corrupted by
big Pharma which are less corrupted
usually child adolescent psychiatrists
are less less corrupted by big Pharma
because big Pharma is not so interested
in adolescent psychiatry so I think the
child adolescent Psychiatry is not that
much spoiled by all this you know all
this wrong path which Psychiatry took
but some of child psychiatrist have a
dream to become as biological as adult
psychiatry because then you become
powerful but when you become powerful
you you you do harm and you you may be
too too too corrupted so
uh very different picture National and
Global levels like in my region in my
country psychiatric associations are not
interested in human rights not no not
interested in that many people are still
staying in in in large institutions for
this is Legacy from the past and uh not
very much interested to let's
say to analyze the past so I have I have
the discussion with my colleagues they
tell that there was no political abuse
in Soviet Lithuania let's say let let's
close this topic there is no because
then you will have difficult talk that
because your teachers were involved so
better let's be humanistic and not not
create troubles so this is I think
introduction to capitulation when you
when you ask why so why psychiatric
professional group is so opportunistic
you know even even in in in in
democracies u i I had very interesting
interview two years ago with psychiatric
times and you can find it maybe you read
and this was very interesting question
about uh values and the person who
interviewed me Miss Dr afab he told that
as you know you were criticize or
emphasizing values values in Psychiatry
and he asked me to
comment why I think that values are
important not only evidence in
Psychiatry that question I should say
maybe even irritates me because I really
don't understand how can be medicine and
Psychiatry ignoring values we know
history of Psychiatry is history of
tragedies of atrocities and you know and
this German Nazi
experience the the eutanasia program
recommended by professors of genetics
and Psychiatry you know and then
lobotomy and all these things and in
Soviet Union we had this other other
things and this all was good was was
presented as evidencebased and you know
with good good intentions to help people
but something wrong was with values my
my professor my first day I remember in
Psychiatry my professor called
the husband of a lady who was diagnosed
schizophrenia and husband came and told
you I insist that you divorce this lady
as soon as possible because because she
has severe mental illness I and I was
asking
why you give such a recommendation you
know well because you we we we need to
take care of normal people he would live
in hell so so then I understood that
something is wrong you know with vales I
was thinking that we should take care of
Rights of of patient so to say so that
was very deep in in mindset and my
answer in this interview was
that um we we know from many painful
chapters in the history of Psychiatry
and Medicine what happens with
discoveries in bi medicine when they
disconnected from values and when they
undermine human rights they can become
dangerous and harmful and if influential
psychiatrists continue to repeat that
values are not a priority in mental
health here we should not be surprised
that Global mental health and global
psychiatrist facing a crisis which in a
large extent is a moral crisis or a
crisis of values so when we raise issue
why even today there is political abuse
of Psychiatry so I think that because of
this crisis moral crisis of values
and well the Psychiatric
association uh is ignoring the standing
blind
to obvious you know violations of human
rights in different countries for maybe
understandable reasons because there are
many influential psychiatrists from th
those
countries in the leadership of well
Psychiatric association so as normal
people They arrange things in this way
so this is this is what what means to be
normal yes and then if you go other way
so maybe you will be diagnosed by the
way now I noticed that if in Soviet
Union all these special people with the
disobedient and who were not silenced
yes who were protesting regime their
diagnos schizophrenia now the in
democracies for example the trend is to
diagnose the autism spectrum disorder
because again the reasonable people
adapt yes I think what was quote from
from George Bernard show that there are
two groups of people reasonable people
who adapt and unreasonable people who
who want to change the world yes but
then J berar made decision that this is
why all the progress in the world is up
to unreasonable people yes because they
move the world um ahead but in
Psychiatry they are diagnosed so that
means somehow we should try to fix the
the mental health something something is
wrong if you if
you do not follow majority which is
opportunistic and tends Blind Eye yes so
well Psychiatric association tends Blind
Eye and that that means it's it's normal
so with they ignore appeals to address
situation in Russian Psychiatry which is
collaborating and supporting the war in
Ukraine and so on so many professional
Groups
International have made some decisions
yes on these like psychological
associations yes but not psychiatric
Psychiatric
association is is is going this way of
course this this this I disagree and I I
I don't like such kind of you know
opportunism or even maybe stronger words
with we should use but just uh
just this is attempt to to try to
understand the mechanisms behind that
such obvious violations of human rights
including political abuse and we as
International Community psychiatric
Community pretend that we we don't know
about this and even do not raise the
voice at least in rhetorics in in in in
statement so this is this is I think is
alarming so painful lessons from history
of Psychiatry should warn us that values
and human rights need to be taken
seriously in in all medicine not only in
Psychiatry but especially in Psychiatry
existing classification allows to
diagnose cases of Civil Disobedience as
pathological ones so psychiatrist can
tell that he is doing nothing wrong if
government asked to
psychiatrist to diagnose such person he
she the our colleague will follow
classification and diagnose and then the
government may use this diagnosis and
the prevalence of Co by the way despite
new investments in mental health care
prevalence of involuntary measures yes
non-consensual measures is on the rise
in all countries including both Global
North and Global South so here here are
the symptoms which which in this a lot
of such symptoms and one of them is
political abuse of
psychiet and of course this means that
satus s and Psychiatry needs serious
critical analysis and change the
question is from which groups this
change should come after Co break after
Co break I was happy this year to travel
to many countries now in in position of
former special reporter I was happy to
to be invited to countries like Japan
Brazil Australia
Norway
taian I I am going in end November to
Chile which which is working on new
mental health legislation so these are
these are some good signs you know but
of course in most cases I'm invited not
from Psychiatric association but for
example in Chile I'm invited by Ministry
of Health
but in Japan I was invited by Bar
Association the the lawyers want to end
this INF famous Japanese you know
extremely repressive approach to people
with mental health conditions but not
psychi again these are lawyers who
understand that things have gone wrong
so um so this uh uh but when we take a
general picture both in global South and
Global North
the things are not so very good because
this bias use evidence like you
know uh all these messages still going
that medications are the best way to to
manage mental health issues power
imbalances which I think damage not only
disempower not only users of services
but also all all
non-medical mental health professionals
because every time psychiatrist made
tell that you I know I I am better
expert because I I finished medicine yes
but in fact psychiatrists know that they
do not know more but they have to play
this game which I think is not healthy
also to to mental health of psychiatrist
to to pretend that you know but when
when you don't really know and so all
this and again overuse of by medical
model all this feeds this Legacy and
reinforces this vicious cycle and that
psychiatr so vulnerable so immune to
systemic violations of human rights can
be very easily corrupted and even can
with the hands of psychiatrists
political abuse may happen just we can
formulate it is political abuse of
Psychiatry means that Psychiatry is
abused
yes maybe misused or psychiatrists are
doing abuse so these are maybe different
shades but in all cases this are this is
very sad very deplorable uh phenomenon
um I was happy some weeks ago to and I
recommend to you you can find this in
Mad America the the two authors M Fon
from Essex University and from Norway uh
they made analysis of responses to
reports of special repor yes that were
my reports but this is about analysis of
responses and especially responses of a
powerful psychiatric groups it's it's
not for me to comment yes but it's very
good that independent researchers did
analysis of of responses and arguments
that were used so the same argument
probably would be used if we ask well
Psychiatric association why are you
ignoring brutal cases of political abuse
of Psychiatry I don't know what what
would be their answer but in Mad in
America there is a Blog but in that blog
you can find link to to the
serious
publication which
is you know this analysis very good
analysis by these responses and they it
tell tells a lot about the situation in
in
global global men mental health and
especially in in global Psychiatry so uh
I was uh thinking now to summarize and
to list some some conclusions but for
you for this group that would be
excessive because you all know where are
the roots where are the obstacles I just
wanted to to give my angle and to add to
what was told by Derek and to this what
happened with the effects of
neoliberalism I fully agree but not to
forget that there are there are you
know threats coming from authoritarian
regimes and I still think that it is
better and more healthy to live in
democracy than to live in the country
which which there is no democracy of
course democracies also have a lot of
problem problems which we know but at
least they they have possibility to
discuss this openly and and do not close
space for civil society but I spent half
of my time in in that so-called you know
that was called socialism I I understand
that that many people are dreaming about
you know good socialism but but in my in
my case where I was living this equality
was reached with brutality of you know
destroying communities people and you
know and pretending equality in orellan
way so so I I hope I hope to see in my
life socialism which which works you
know effectively and I understand that
capitalism is is not the system which we
we should commend but the problem is
that um which I already do but
Psychiatry or mental health let's say is
suffering in uh in all in all scenarios
we know and this is means that we will
continue to have a lot of work to do so
I think I stop here and maybe we can
have some time I'm sorry when we when
there will be end of our I have some
other activity and I will leave you I I
am sorry to especially to next speakers
that I I I will not be able to
join thank you so much
danus we can start with the
questions oh sorry I I have a question
but I don't know who was
first I would say go first Sarah and
then Peter youf thank you um how should
I refer to you can can I call you danus
or how should I refer to you okay sure
okay thank you my name is Sarah I'm with
mind freedom and um my first question is
kind of personal my second question more
political strategic so my first question
is what is your role in the convention
on the rights of the um on the rights of
people with disabilities what was your
role in that and then my second question
which is not as personal it's more
political um what are the implications
of crpd to enforcing the rights of
people who are being subjected to forc
Psychiatry how can crpd be used um in
those cases and then lastly what are the
implications of crpd given that many
people who are subjected to force
Psychiatry for political reason don't
identify with being
disabled
oh thank you I'm not sure if I managed
to to to to give good answers to all
questions but to some uh and these are
very good questions uh I have to confess
that with when I was formulating no this
this this mechanism which I was
representing is So-Cal special
procedures which means independent
experts on different issues by Mand that
was right to health and then you
formulate position of the Mandate yes of
the Mandate it's not that puras or some
other there is now position of mandate
of right to health and this position is
that the Mandate of right to health of
un is um let's say positions very close
to crpd
committee agrees with CPD committee and
very far from position of you know
mainstream Psychiatry so you probably
understand how how unhappy were were
psychiatric establishment because the
they expected from me because I'm
psychiatrist yes so they they they saw
this as especially painful betrayal yes
so of Guild and so on so this is clear
story but the other side human rights
activists not all but some reacted to my
position also critically because what I
did I told if governments refuse to
follow this recommendation of CRBT
committee to ban all non-consensual
measures now and as you know all
countries refus to do this so far so
then I tell then I I I Edge these
governments to move at least policy way
and to prioritize and to fund all these
good Alternatives which which are many
non-cohesive you know Alternatives they
are many but they are sideline they are
let's say tolerated by governments and
and mainstream psychiatry cive
psychiatry is funded and as a priority
so I sort of made a compromise and I
told if you don't
ban nonconsensual measures so do at
least this and they're not doing even
this now my newest
sad news is that in
Norway medication free units are under
big threat maybe closed so it's one of
examples that it's not so easy with you
know going ahead so that was that that
position of mine was interpreted by some
human rights activists that I betrayed
them because I S of allow moratorium I
allow uh not to ban noncon measures now
and move policy way I I agree that this
may be felt painfully by people who
suffered from from Psychiatry who are
survivors of Psychiatry but frankly I
was looking for the way because when
somebody will ask me a psychiatrist okay
Dr puras you are so clever so tell what
you should do in that this case and they
will present some case and I tell I
don't know
I don't know how to manage this case
without question so how you why you then
how can you is it moral to recommend to
ban if you don't know so this is but I
respect very much position of crpd
committee but I just acknowledge the
fact that all governments are not
planning to follow it I don't know what
what to do with this maybe we can go
with steps towards full elimination of
question but then as as one human rights
activist told during one meeting very
sarcastically why don't I then recommend
to you and to why I don't do the same
recommendation with phenomenon of rape
yes and I I understand the the meaning
of her your her question was sarcastical
because the rape is also not easy to
abandon so so you and and I understand
how because she felt during procedures
of restraints she fed like like like
like like suffering from rape and this
is serious so that that would be my my
sincere reply to your first question and
with if I
understood well second question is is I
am on the side of users of services very
much because frankly the m in in almost
small countries almost all countries
psychiatric establishment especially Le
leadership and that is academic
professors and directors of psychiatric
institutions they do not take convention
seriously they ignore convention because
convention very
openly uh you know um questions medical
model yes even in in in rhetorics look
convention does not
use terminology like mental illness or
mental disease or mental disorder yes
but
Psychiatry if you take any new
textbooks even from most modern
psychiatrist you will find here that
there are you know mental illnesses
mental diseases and they and Psychiatry
very strongly supports idea that for
example schizophrenia is mental illness
and only psychiatrists can uh let's say
how you tell
um help with dignity because they will
fix disorder
first also involuntary if needed and
then only this person can live with
dignity so I don't want to say that I I
support this this position I don't
support but this is how Psychiatry is
continuing to keep Psychiatry as part of
clinical medicine because otherwise you
know they are they think that if it is
not a medical model that they are not
needed I think that psychiatrists are
needed but I have a dream that future
of Psychiatry should be social
Psychiatry but then it will be not so
powerful again yes so and will share uh
share power with others which I I think
will be more healthy but not so powerful
so this is not direct reply to your
question
but the the main this impass uh problem
I see there
that majority ofst refuse to take
seriously main messages of crpd
convention and they take okay physical
disabilities is okay we agree that
wheelchair let's say wheelchair and not
MediCal interventions and let's remove
barriers yes for physical disability but
when it comes to schizophrenia they tell
this is not like physical disability
this is illness which the person
was mentally okay and then he or she got
ill with medical illness and then they
keep to Medical model you know and then
they tell only we can fix so now now
I hope that this situation is changing
I'm not so very optimistic but I I did
not do research but up around 10% of
psychiatrists in in countries are now
let's say moving to this human rights
based approach but clear minority of
course so far but still it was like 5%
now maybe 10% I don't know it will be it
will be more more than 50 someday but
for this moment Psychiatry what they are
taught in medical schools I agree very
much that crucial point is medical
education medical doctors are taught
that the more aggressive you are the
better doctor you are so this again you
know the the idea of aggressive doctor
you save lives psychiatrist save lives
they give good medications and they
prevent suicide homicide this is all
myth this is all no not evidence-based
that this this is what students future
doctors learn in
in almost all medical schools so sorry
sorry if I was not quite precise in
replying to your concrete questions but
this is a very serious conflict between
crpd main
messages and uh and world of medicine
which supports by the way wel Medical
Association strongly was supporting
World Psychiatric association when in
all this responses so means that world
Psychiatric association is backed by
World Medical
[Music]
Association thank you denus Peter uh I
will give you the word now then Artin
and then
Derek okay um um my question comes from
an experience I had about more than 40
years ago I was in a live TV show and it
was called um um call Direct that means
people um people could call um and asked
directly live questions and I sat there
with a lot with some psychiatrists also
the chair of the German organization of
Psychiatry and neurology and one men
called and asked is a halop peridol
which is used in Soviet Union to torture
people to torture political Prisoners
the same halop paradol which is used
systematically in normal medicine and
the psychiatrist answerers this simply
yes it's the same and when I think um um
that that um for political repression
halor parol is used and in Psychiatry
and electroshocks is used like in um
Psychiatry I want to ask danus where
would you set the the border between
misuse or abuse and so-called
therapeutical use when the treatment is
the same and when the treatment in
Psychiatry all over the world not in
your clinic but all over the world is
without informed consent
because you cannot give consent when
there's no
information about
risks thank you Peter thank you nice
nice to see you even if in remote way um
but uh that yes I will try to that is
very good and painful question because I
do not have until now
precise answer and I was trying to
formulate again position of the Manda
and then I
was was using formulation that I
criticized over use of for example
biomedical interventions which is
obvious in in in all countries and for
different reasons but it's obvious and
then my my young young doctors they tell
that in my country that they pres will
prescribe medication in any case even in
child psychiatry because just doctor has
to do something and psychosocial
interventions are not available so I am
a doctor so I have to to give medication
so
it's um it's very deep and of
course in United States but in many
other countries and then I was saying no
don't overuse and then some human rights
activists were telling why you use this
very weak formulation you should tell
don't use medication but if I tell as a
doctor don't use medication that then I
go to probably I don't want to be
identified with uh you know anti
Psychiatry with Scientology you know and
I I think that medications may be
helpful in severe depression in some
cases of
psychosis which may be uh you know for
some biological reasons you can you
should act in medical way but this is
minority of cases I agree Psychiatry
played the trick that they told that all
our interventions are life saving this
is how how this you know expanded but we
can always can find cases when mental
health you know crisis is because of
biological some catastroph and then you
need medical interventions including
including medications so this if you say
never Med psychotropic medications I
think you move too far but then you
create this gray Zone that everybody
like the students they know how to reply
in exam that medications are needed for
severe cases and not needed for not
severe cases but then I in practice I
know that there are doctors who will
prescribe anti-depressant to maybe one
in
10 person with depression and there are
doctors who will prescribe to nine in 10
and there is no way to say who of them
is better because the psychiatr is not
exact signs no markers no nothing so
this is why the in this gray Zone
usually big Pharma is very effective you
know to to always find the way how to
how to convince doctors and patients
that you better use medications so this
the same with
electroconvulsive I I I I think that in
some cases electroconvulsive therapy in
modern way of course could be used but
then you open Pandora box yes I agree
and in many countries like in my country
the prevalence of these cases of when
electroconvulsive therapy in in inv
voluntary ways uses is rising and of
course it is overused misused not for
political abuse but there are no good
psychosocial services and these all
cases are qualified as treatment
resistant depression so they start
immediately from anti-depressants they
do not help and they tell okay
anti-depressants do not help so let's
move to Electro convulsive or impulsive
therapy so again I should talk should
talk about overuse but some critics may
tell and tell means you allow why don't
you uh agge to ban so the same the same
issue we see it's looks like Devil in
the detail but it's so difficult to
find solution and this is why all these
field is stuck from 2006 yeah when
convention was is stuck in this impass
sitation that all sides have their
arguments and there is no real movement
to one or other side including with but
I agree with your worries that in
general as we know still despite all
this wh position let's abandon over a by
medical model more and more for example
Children and adolescents in countries
like UK
Australia are
medicated
means worrying things happen and there
is not good scenario to to overuse you
know even for children so this would be
my
comment thank
you Aron if you
wish yeah thank you so much U thank you
Dr pz for the presentation I have a
quick question and maybe a little bit of
comment I know there are multiple
factors involved been human rights abuse
in psychiatric settings and political
abuse of Psychiatry but I just
remembered once I was having a course
with medical students about overview of
DSM criteria and one of the medical
students at the end of the course said
that a DSM leaves no one behind there is
in a sarcastic joke way that there is
diagnosis for everybody when somebody
comes to see a psychiatrist there is a
diagnosis there so I wonder how much you
think the current uh diagnostic
criterias in DSM and
ICD and also mental health acts in the
countries give uh room to polit
politicians and governments or
psychiatrists to abuse Psychiatry
because the the criteria in DSM I think
it's very sometimes
vague sometimes a uh uh subject to
personal uh assessment and there's no
objectivity there I I would like to know
your comments on that thank
you thank you uh a nice to see you and
uh good
question I am uh very much against this
proliferation of diagnostic you know
categories it's it's it's I like this
campaign disorder for everyone yes this
ironical yes and and it's not a joke
that
psychiatrist can diagnose everyone in in
current classification yes so something
went wrong I think and but the I see
here problem even in general medicine
because medicine also in some other
fields was like imperialistic was trying
to occupy new territories yes let us
take
andiz so especially that was of course
in Psychiatry with all kind of you know
social phobia and if you anxious when
you have to do presentation I think it's
very
normal but you know take medication yes
and you will be not anxious and um but
uh I there was once idea yeah F luckily
it stopped hopefully it will not rematch
I received some some letter some years
ago that some group of uh experts wanted
to to
to invent one more diagnostic category
which is shyness in children yes shy
childhood so then we we pathology
trinness and the argument is that then
then we can think about reimbursement of
of
therapy so this is the the argument you
know that they are not so bad people
they want to help people so so because
in all Medical
Systems if there is no diagnosis so
money is not
coming yes you must for health insurance
you must have diagnosis so that is that
is argument know that is argument let's
diagnose this phenomenon
and me and other experts were very much
against because I think that is one of
best best things what human beings have
shyness and then we we decide that this
is pathological you know so so um yes I
I think that and it creates also you
know which problem it's total confusion
then between mad and bad yes and then we
here I do not will not mention names but
when you hear some political leader in
the past or now who is arranging brutal
killings you know of let's say other
nations then you hear from experts oh
he's mentally
ill yeah he has mental disorder the
former leaders the current leaders and
it's so bad for it's it's so
stigmatizing you
know because they are not this they're
not they they're not me Al patients they
are they are yes morally something is
wrong with them but it's not not
Psychiatry but this confusion this
proliferation of diagnostic categories
creates this phenomen that you can
diagnose everyone and you get so if he's
planning or if if he's killing many
people do you think it is normal so I
receive such question do you think he is
normal he's not normal he must go to
mental hospital no he must go to H not
not to mental hospital so so the the the
this confusion serves very badly for for
destigmatization Psychiatry how how can
these people feel who have such
diagnosis who have such conditions when
they are compared to you know to
this political leaders who are you know
who are should be brought to justice so
this this is other side effect of this
proliferation of diagnostic categories
that you see in TV some political leader
speaking who may be he has some
personality issues yes and then you tell
oh mental mental case mental case you
know so that
that that I think the the problems like
political abuse and starts from
diagnostic the the the this issue the
the diagnostic system which was
expanding
and and and people ask so is is is this
autism illness no it's not illness it's
just you know diversity so why it is in
in
classification yes so I don't know and I
met International groups when I was
special reporter I met good
International groups like autistic
minority International like asper you
know young asper they insist that not
only psychiatrist but also
[Music]
psychologists do do not they do not they
do not understand that doctors and
psychologist what they want to to to do
with this why they want to to change us
when we are we represent diversity you
should be happy that we do exist but now
you are your pathology you are in f f
you ICD in DSM so we need to fix you
somehow so maybe I am simplifying but
this is how people understand you know
that if it is diagnosis you you have to
rush and take and and act you know and
this is the wrong
message thank
you thank you Denise dere you
wish
dere if you want to go with the question
or if anybody else wants to jump if they
cannot
know sorry can you hear me
enri yes I do we we do just very briefly
I I just want to say to danus um I was
interested the Cas presented that
Lithuanian young man or woman who set
fire to him or herself you know danius
was saying power imbalances are treated
as chemical imbalances well I just
wanted to give you the most Hest example
I know right now of how religio medical
uh religio political differences are
treated as psychological disturbance
there are now special units in British
prisons in the middle of Prisons high
security which are sealed off from the
rest of the prison 90% of the people in
there are are Muslim men and these units
are run by psychologists answerable not
to any health authority but to the
Secret Service and the police a
completely sealed Unit A grotesque thing
no one says anything the Roy College of
Psychiatry uh obeys its basic mandate to
support the state um and there these
young men with differences uh of
political and religious Outlook are
being uh put through programs which
supposedly will psychologically cleanse
them well really that's just a sluggish
schizophrenia story all over
again thanks anyway that's all just a
comment thank you Darius danus great
thank
you
perfect ER there is anybody else that
wants to
ask
otherwise I am gonna say thank you Danel
for the presentation has been amazing I
have one quick question um how can
people contact Dr
purus okay you can you maybe I enri has
my email address maybe you can write
because I I can don't know if I if I
know how to do this
quickly so thank you I'll get it from
enri thank
you well I will close with one question
is actually the band of non-voluntary
measures on the table will that at least
be proposed and if countries wish to
apply
it the UN has the has this as one of the
possibilities you you mentioned that
that's something that you didn't want to
go for
but you mean you ask me yeah the about
the involuntary measures exactly so we
were expecting a lot we should study
better I had no time because one week
ago maybe now two weeks ago wh launched
another document which is about mental
health legislation and this is a serious
step ahead but I think that they did not
fully formulated this you
know probably for obvious
reasons I'm afraid that they went
similar way like I was describing you
will not find find very clear uh you
know strong recommendation to ban but
you will find a lot of critics to
existing systems which create and
reinforce this helplessness and c and
and you will find many good you
know analytical critical comments about
existing system how to move ahead but
you will not find this let's say
revolutionary recomend Commendation and
then many people will not be happy like
users you know and again I I but but I
still have to study because this is a
long long uh this is a long document so
it's not it's a guidance guidance with
very good as I told analysis of systems
and then when it comes to
recommendations they are probably a
little bit vague or or maybe too vague
okay we have now
chrism is the next speaker danus thank
you so much thank you thank you bye good
lucke thank you
byebye Chris I'm very happy that you're
here
uh we cannot hear you
now uh okay for the delay in joining I'm
glad to be here
now very happy that you're here